README.md, before:

# Green Software Engineering Practices for GitHub Actions Continuous Integration (CI) workflows

In this repository, we encourage the use of green software engineering practices
in continuous integration (CI) workflows implemented with GitHub Actions. It
provides [documentation](#best-practices) and templates on how to optimise CI
pipelines to reduce energy consumption, minimise resource usage, and promote
sustainable software development practices. By adopting these strategies,
developers can reduce the carbon footprint of their work and contribute to
environmentally friendly software engineering while maintaining efficient and
reliable CI processes.

## Existing Literature

There are a couple of studies on this topic, for example [Carbon Awareness in CI/CD by Classen et al](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18718)
and [Carbon-Aware Continuous Integration: Reducing Emissions Without Sacrificing Performance by Laskar](https://lorojournals.com/index.php/emsj/article/view/1581).
These mostly rely on scheduling workloads for low-carbon times or shifting to low-carbon locations, as well as reducing overhead in the workloads (e.g., through
minimisation of unnecessary runs and builds).

Tool like [Eco CI](https://github.com/green-coding-solutions/eco-ci-energy-estimation) can help measuring/estimating the energy consumption of CI/CD runs which can help 
making informed decisions about adapting the runs. There are [a range of other tools](https://github.blog/open-source/social-impact/the-10-best-tools-to-green-your-software/) out there
that can help you make your software development practices greener.

## Usage

*Work in progress*

## Best practices

### Time limits

By default, a job will continue running for 360 minutes (6 hours) before being
cancelled. This can be extremely wasteful in cases where the code has stalled,
for example. As such, it is good practice to provide a shorter time limit after
which the job will be cancelled. This should be an over-estimate, so that the
job will still pass when the code is working as expected.

Some example GitHub Actions workflow syntax for implementing a 10 minute time
limit on a job called `test-ubuntu-serial` with the `ubuntu-latest` runner is as
follows:
```yml
jobs:
  test-ubuntu-serial:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    timeout-minutes: 10
    # <Further job definition>
```

In most cases, your job will hopefully complete and pass within the allotted
time limit. However, there may be cases where this doesn't happen. This could
happen due to:
1. There is an intermittent or random issue (e.g., connection issue to an web
   resource, hardware malfunction, cosmic ray). In such cases, it may be
   sufficient to retry the workflow manually by clicking the red cross
   indicating the workflow failure, selecting the offending job, and clicking
   the 'Re-run jobs' button near the top of the page.
2. The job has stalled due to an issue on your branch. Addressing this will
   require [debugging](#debugging) your change.
3. You made a change that just causes your tests or docs build to require longer
   to run. In this case, you'll need to increase the time limit.

### Concurrency

Suppose you or one of your collaborators has triggered a GitHub Actions
workflow and it has jobs that are still running. If someone triggers the same
workflow again (e.g., by pushing a commit) then it usually doesn't make sense
for the original workflow to continue running, given that the subsequent one
corresponds to the more recent version of the branch. In such cases, it can make
sense to configure the `concurrency` so that in-progress jobs will be cancelled.
This can be achieved with the following syntax:
```yml
concurrency:
  group: ${{ github.workflow }}-${{ github.event.pull_request.number || github.ref }}
  cancel-in-progress: true
```

### Triggers

Suppose you want to make a small change such as fixing typos or updating
Markdown files. In a naive CI setup, this will trigger the full suite, involving
tasks such as running tests, building documentation, and running static analysis
tools. This can be extremely wasteful, especially for large repositories with
long-running test suites. One way to avoid this is to make use of *triggers*.
You might be familiar with triggers related to pushing to particular branches,
pushes to open PRs, and manual triggering from the
[Actions](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci/actions) tab, as
demonstrated below:
```yml
name: MyTestSuite

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to the "main" branch, i.e., PR merges
  push:
    branches: [ "main" ]

  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests
  pull_request:

  # Allows you to run this workflow manually from the Actions tab
  workflow_dispatch:
```

In the following, we restrict attention to `pull_request` triggers because it
usually makes sense to run the full workflow when merging into `main` and the
`workflow_dispatch` option already allows for finer-grained control over
specific jobs. Returning to the case of updating a Markdown file, the test suite
above will still run if a commit is pushed to an open PR doing so. To avoid this
unnecessary test run, we can specify a list of `paths` for files that would
trigger the test suite when they are run. For example, in Python we could use:
```yml
name: MyPythonTestSuite

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests with code changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/test_suite_python.yml'
      - '**.py'
      - 'requirements.txt'
```
where `test_suite_python.yml` is the name of the workflow file itself. Here the
workflow will only be run if the file itself, any Python source files, or the
repository's `requirements.txt` dependencies file change.

For compiled languages such as C, it often also is a good idea to include
files related to the build system. For example:
```yml
name: MyCTestSuite

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests with code changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/test_suite_c.yml'
      - '**.c'
      - '**.h'
      - '**CMakeLists.txt'
```
for source code with extension `.c`, header files with extension `.h`, and CMake
build files.

### Separation of concerns

The information on [triggers](#triggers) above is useful but what if you have
workflows for other tasks than just tests, such as static analysis and
documentation builds? In such cases, it's good practice to implement separate
workflows with appropriate triggers.

In the example case of a Python code that uses the
[ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/) static analysis tool for linting and
formatting, the triggers could take the form:
```yml
name: MyPythonStaticAnalysisWorkflow

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests with code changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/static_analysis_python.yml'
      - '**.py'
```
where `static_analysis_python.yml` is the filename of the workflow. Here, the
workflow will only be triggered when commits are pushed that include changes to
the workflow configuration or Python source code.

In the example case where Fortran documentation is built using
[FORD](https://github.com/Fortran-FOSS-Programmers/ford), the triggers could
take the form:
```yml
name: BuildDocs

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests to main with documentation changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/build_docs_ford.yml'
      - '**.md'
      - 'pages/*'
```

The above can be extended to separate out CPU vs. GPU test suites, test suites
on different operating systems (e.g., Ubuntu, Mac, Windows), and
[JOSS](https://joss.theoj.org/) paper rendering, for example. Having separated
concerns in this way, the overall number of jobs can be reduced, provided the
contributor doesn't modify several different parts of the repository in the same
change.

> [!NOTE]
> In some cases it can be a good thing for contributors to edit multiple
> different types of files in the same change. For example, it is good practice
> to update documentation in line with changes to source code.

### Test PRs

*Work in progress* (https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci/issues/5)

## Debugging

If your code fails during a CI run, it sometimes can be hard to find the issue without trying and pushing a series of fixes, which in turn will trigger the CI to run each time - and thus waste energy.
If the issue is not in the test suite which can be easily rerun (for example, using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/), a tool like [act](https://github.com/nektos/act) can be used to run your CI pipeline locally in a container.

Alternatively, you can interact with your GitHub actions using [action-tmate](https://github.com/mxschmitt/action-tmate) (with tmate being a fork of [tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki)). This enables you to use ssh to connect with the machine that the actions are run on.

Commit message:

feat: Added green ci template for docs
Added green ci template for buildind documentation
in 'template' directory. Additionally,
usage instruction has also been added.

---

Related issue: https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci/issues/6

README.md, after:

# Green Software Engineering Practices for GitHub Actions Continuous Integration (CI) workflows

In this repository, we encourage the use of green software engineering practices
in continuous integration (CI) workflows implemented with GitHub Actions. It
provides [documentation](#best-practices) and templates on how to optimise CI
pipelines to reduce energy consumption, minimise resource usage, and promote
sustainable software development practices. By adopting these strategies,
developers can reduce the carbon footprint of their work and contribute to
environmentally friendly software engineering while maintaining efficient and
reliable CI processes.

## Existing Literature

There are a couple of studies on this topic, for example [Carbon Awareness in CI/CD by Classen et al](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.18718)
and [Carbon-Aware Continuous Integration: Reducing Emissions Without Sacrificing Performance by Laskar](https://lorojournals.com/index.php/emsj/article/view/1581).
These mostly rely on scheduling workloads for low-carbon times or shifting to low-carbon locations, as well as reducing overhead in the workloads (e.g., through
minimisation of unnecessary runs and builds).

Tool like [Eco CI](https://github.com/green-coding-solutions/eco-ci-energy-estimation) can help measuring/estimating the energy consumption of CI/CD runs which can help 
making informed decisions about adapting the runs. There are [a range of other tools](https://github.blog/open-source/social-impact/the-10-best-tools-to-green-your-software/) out there
that can help you make your software development practices greener.

## Usage

This repository provides templates for GitHub Actions workflows that can be
used as a starting point for implementing green software engineering practices in CI pipelines.
To use the templates, use `copier` with instructions below.
You can then modify the workflow files to suit your specific needs,
such as changing the triggers, adding or removing jobs, and adjusting the time
limits.

You will need to `pip install copier`, then you can create a new module via:

```bash
copier copy https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci.git /path/to/my-project
```

You can also use it via `uvx copier` if you have `uv` installed.

## Best practices

### Time limits

By default, a job will continue running for 360 minutes (6 hours) before being
cancelled. This can be extremely wasteful in cases where the code has stalled,
for example. As such, it is good practice to provide a shorter time limit after
which the job will be cancelled. This should be an over-estimate, so that the
job will still pass when the code is working as expected.

Some example GitHub Actions workflow syntax for implementing a 10 minute time
limit on a job called `test-ubuntu-serial` with the `ubuntu-latest` runner is as
follows:
```yml
jobs:
  test-ubuntu-serial:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    timeout-minutes: 10
    # <Further job definition>
```

In most cases, your job will hopefully complete and pass within the allotted
time limit. However, there may be cases where this doesn't happen. This could
happen due to:
1. There is an intermittent or random issue (e.g., connection issue to an web
   resource, hardware malfunction, cosmic ray). In such cases, it may be
   sufficient to retry the workflow manually by clicking the red cross
   indicating the workflow failure, selecting the offending job, and clicking
   the 'Re-run jobs' button near the top of the page.
2. The job has stalled due to an issue on your branch. Addressing this will
   require [debugging](#debugging) your change.
3. You made a change that just causes your tests or docs build to require longer
   to run. In this case, you'll need to increase the time limit.

### Concurrency

Suppose you or one of your collaborators has triggered a GitHub Actions
workflow and it has jobs that are still running. If someone triggers the same
workflow again (e.g., by pushing a commit) then it usually doesn't make sense
for the original workflow to continue running, given that the subsequent one
corresponds to the more recent version of the branch. In such cases, it can make
sense to configure the `concurrency` so that in-progress jobs will be cancelled.
This can be achieved with the following syntax:
```yml
concurrency:
  group: ${{ github.workflow }}-${{ github.event.pull_request.number || github.ref }}
  cancel-in-progress: true
```

### Triggers

Suppose you want to make a small change such as fixing typos or updating
Markdown files. In a naive CI setup, this will trigger the full suite, involving
tasks such as running tests, building documentation, and running static analysis
tools. This can be extremely wasteful, especially for large repositories with
long-running test suites. One way to avoid this is to make use of *triggers*.
You might be familiar with triggers related to pushing to particular branches,
pushes to open PRs, and manual triggering from the
[Actions](https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci/actions) tab, as
demonstrated below:
```yml
name: MyTestSuite

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to the "main" branch, i.e., PR merges
  push:
    branches: [ "main" ]

  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests
  pull_request:

  # Allows you to run this workflow manually from the Actions tab
  workflow_dispatch:
```

In the following, we restrict attention to `pull_request` triggers because it
usually makes sense to run the full workflow when merging into `main` and the
`workflow_dispatch` option already allows for finer-grained control over
specific jobs. Returning to the case of updating a Markdown file, the test suite
above will still run if a commit is pushed to an open PR doing so. To avoid this
unnecessary test run, we can specify a list of `paths` for files that would
trigger the test suite when they are run. For example, in Python we could use:
```yml
name: MyPythonTestSuite

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests with code changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/test_suite_python.yml'
      - '**.py'
      - 'requirements.txt'
```
where `test_suite_python.yml` is the name of the workflow file itself. Here the
workflow will only be run if the file itself, any Python source files, or the
repository's `requirements.txt` dependencies file change.

For compiled languages such as C, it often also is a good idea to include
files related to the build system. For example:
```yml
name: MyCTestSuite

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests with code changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/test_suite_c.yml'
      - '**.c'
      - '**.h'
      - '**CMakeLists.txt'
```
for source code with extension `.c`, header files with extension `.h`, and CMake
build files.

### Separation of concerns

The information on [triggers](#triggers) above is useful but what if you have
workflows for other tasks than just tests, such as static analysis and
documentation builds? In such cases, it's good practice to implement separate
workflows with appropriate triggers.

In the example case of a Python code that uses the
[ruff](https://docs.astral.sh/ruff/) static analysis tool for linting and
formatting, the triggers could take the form:
```yml
name: MyPythonStaticAnalysisWorkflow

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests with code changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/static_analysis_python.yml'
      - '**.py'
```
where `static_analysis_python.yml` is the filename of the workflow. Here, the
workflow will only be triggered when commits are pushed that include changes to
the workflow configuration or Python source code.

In the example case where Fortran documentation is built using
[FORD](https://github.com/Fortran-FOSS-Programmers/ford), the triggers could
take the form:
```yml
name: BuildDocs

on:
  # Triggers the workflow on pushes to open pull requests to main with documentation changes
  pull_request:
    paths:
      - '.github/workflows/build_docs_ford.yml'
      - '**.md'
      - 'pages/*'
```

The above can be extended to separate out CPU vs. GPU test suites, test suites
on different operating systems (e.g., Ubuntu, Mac, Windows), and
[JOSS](https://joss.theoj.org/) paper rendering, for example. Having separated
concerns in this way, the overall number of jobs can be reduced, provided the
contributor doesn't modify several different parts of the repository in the same
change.

> [!NOTE]
> In some cases it can be a good thing for contributors to edit multiple
> different types of files in the same change. For example, it is good practice
> to update documentation in line with changes to source code.

### Test PRs

*Work in progress* (https://github.com/Cambridge-ICCS/green-ci/issues/5)

## Debugging

If your code fails during a CI run, it sometimes can be hard to find the issue without trying and pushing a series of fixes, which in turn will trigger the CI to run each time - and thus waste energy.
If the issue is not in the test suite which can be easily rerun (for example, using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/), a tool like [act](https://github.com/nektos/act) can be used to run your CI pipeline locally in a container.

Alternatively, you can interact with your GitHub actions using [action-tmate](https://github.com/mxschmitt/action-tmate) (with tmate being a fork of [tmux](https://github.com/tmux/tmux/wiki)). This enables you to use ssh to connect with the machine that the actions are run on.
